# A Scalable Language

Scala’s functional programming constructs make it easy to build interesting things quickly from simple parts. Its object-oriented constructs make it easy to structure larger systems and to adapt them to new demands. The combination of both styles in Scala makes it possible to express new kinds of programming patterns and component abstractions. It also leads to a legible and concise programming style.
 
## A language that grows on you

### Growing new types

Instead of providing all constructs you might ever need in one “perfectly complete” language, Scala puts the tools for building such constructs into your hands.

Scala allows users to grow and adapt the language in the directions they need by defining easy-to-use libraries that feel like native language support.

### Growing new control constructs

Java comes with a rich, thread-based concurrency library. Scala pro- grams can use it like any other Java API. However, Scala also offers an ad- ditional library that essentially implements Erlang’s actor model.

Actors are concurrency abstractions that can be implemented on top of threads. They communicate by sending messages to each other. An actor can perform two basic operations, message send and receive.

All in all, actors have turned out to be a very pleasant means for expressing concurrent and distributed computations. Even though they are defined in a library, actors feel like an integral part of the Scala language.

## What makes Scalas calable?

### Scala is object-oriented

The great idea of object-oriented programming is to make these containers fully general, so that they can contain operations as well as data, and that they are themselves values that can be stored in other containers, or passed as parameters to operations. Such containers are called objects.

Scala is an object-oriented language in pure form: every value is an object and every operation is a method call.

Traits are like interfaces in Java, but they can also have method implementations and even fields. Objects are constructed by mixin composition, which takes the members of a class and adds the members of a number of traits to them.
Unlike a class, a trait can add some new functionality to an unspecified superclass. This makes traits more “pluggable” than classes.

### Scala is functional

Functional programming is guided by two main ideas. The first idea is that functions are first-class values. You can pass func- tions as arguments to other functions, return them as results from functions, or store them in variables. You can also define a function inside another function, just as you can define an integer value inside a function. And you can define functions without giving them a name.

Functions that are first-class values provide a convenient means for ab- stracting over operations and creating new control structures. This generalization of functions provides great expressiveness, which often leads to very legible and concise programs.

The second main idea of functional programming is that the operations of a program should map input values to output values rather than change data in place.
Another way of stating this second idea of functional programming is that methods should not have any side effects. They should communicate with their environment only by taking arguments and returning results.

Functional languages encourage immutable data structures and referen- tially transparent methods.

## Why Scala?

### Scala is compatible

It allows you to add value to existing code—to build on what you already have—because it was designed for seamless in- teroperability with Java.

Another aspect of full interoperability is that Scala heavily re-uses Java types.

Scala not only re-uses Java’s types, but also “dresses them up” to make them nicer. Scala lets you define implicit conversions, which are always applied when types would not normally match up, or when non-existing members are se- lected.

### Scala is concise

Scala programs tend to be short.

Fewer lines of code mean not only less typing, but also less effort at reading and understanding programs and fewer possibilities of defects.

Scala’s type inference is another factor that contributes to its conciseness. Repetitive type information can be left out, so programs become less cluttered and more readable.

But probably the most important key to compact code is code you don’t have to write because it is done in a library for you. Scala gives you many tools to define powerful libraries that let you capture and factor out common behavior.

### Scala is high-level

Scala helps you manage complexity by letting you raise the level of abstraction in the interfaces you design and use.
```java
// this is Java
boolean nameHasUpperCase = false;
for (int i = 0; i < name.length(); ++i) {
  if (Character.isUpperCase(name.charAt(i))) {
    nameHasUpperCase = true;
    break;
  }
}
```
```scala
// this is Scala
val nameHasUpperCase = name.exists(_.isUpper)
```

The Java code treats strings as low-level entities that are stepped through character by character in a loop. The Scala code treats the same strings as higher-level sequences of characters that can be queried with predicates.

### Scala is statically typed

A static type system classifies variables and expressions according to the kinds of values they hold and compute. Scala stands out as a language with a very advanced static type system. Starting from a system of nested class types much like Java’s, it allows you to parameterize types with *generics*, to combine types using *intersections*, and to hide details of types using *abstract types*.

Scala addresses nicely two of the usual concerns about static typing: *verbosity* is avoided through type inference and *flexibility* is gained through pattern matching and several new ways to write and compose types.

With these impediments out of the way, the classical benefits of static type systems can be better appreciated. Among the most important of these benefits are verifiable properties of program abstractions, safe refactorings, and better documentation.
- *Verifiable properties* - Static type systems can prove the absence of certain run-time errors.
- *Safe refactorings* - A static type system provides a safety net that lets you make changes to a codebase with a high degree of confidence.
- *Documentation* - Static types are program documentation that is checked by the compiler for correctness.

```scala
val x: HashMap[Int, String] = new HashMap[Int, String]()

val x = new HashMap[Int, String]()
val x: Map[Int, String] = new HashMap()
```
- Scala has a very sophisticated type inference system that lets you omit almost all type information that’s usually considered annoying.

## Scala’s roots
## Conclusion
