# First Steps in Scala

## Step 1. Learn to use the Scala interpreter

The easiest way to get started with Scala is by using the Scala interpreter, an interactive “shell” for writing Scala expressions and programs.

The Scala Interpreter (often called a REPL for Read-Evaluate-Print Loop) sits in an unusual design space - an interactive interpreter for a statically typed language straddles two worlds which historically have been distinct.

## Step 2. Define some variables

Scala has two kinds of variables, vals and vars. A val is similar to a final variable in Java. Once initialized, a val can never be reassigned. A var, by contrast, is similar to a non-final variable in Java. A var can be reassigned throughout its lifetime.

### Step 3. Define some functions

```scala
scala> def max(x: Int, y: Int): Int = {
     |   if (x > y) x
     |   else y
     | }
max: (x: Int, y: Int)Int
```
- `def` starts a function definition
- `max`: function name
- `x: Int, y: Int`: parameter list in parentheses
- `: Int`: function's result type
- `{...}`: function body in curly braces

## Step 4. Write some Scala scripts

hello.scala
```scala
println("hello world")
```
```shell
$ scala hello.scala
hello world
```

helloarg.scala
```scala
println("hello " + args(0) + "!")
```
```shell
$ scala helloarg.scala planet
hello planet!
```
- In Scala, arrays are zero based, and you access an element by specifying an index in parentheses. 

## Step 5. Loop with while; decide with if

printargs.scala
```scala
var i = 0
while (i < args.length) {
  println(args(i))
  i = i + 1
}
```
```shell
$ scala printargs.scala Scala is fun
Scala
is
fun
```

echoargs.scala
```scala
var i = 0
while (i < args.length) {
  if (i != 0)
    print(" ")
  print(args(i))
  i = i + 1
}
println()
```
```shell
$ scala echoargs.scala Scala is even more fun
Scala is even more fun
```

## Step 6. Iterate with foreach and for

In the *imperative style*, which is the style you normally use with languages like Java, C++, and C, you give one imperative command at a time, iterate with loops, and often mutate state shared between different functions. 

Scala enables you to program imperatively, but as you get to know Scala better, you’ll likely often find yourself programming in a more *functional style*.

```scala
args.foreach(arg => println(arg))
```

In this code, you call the `foreach` method on args, and pass in a function. In this case, you’re passing in a *function literal* that takes one parameter named arg. The body of the function is `println(arg)`.

```scala
(x: Int, y: Int) => x + y
```
- `(x: Int, y: Int)`: function parameters in parentheses
- `=>`: right arrow
- `x + y`: function body

```scala
for (arg <- args)
  println(arg)
```
- The parentheses after the “for” contain `arg <- args`. To the right of the `<-` symbol is the familiar args array. To the left of `<-` is “arg”, the name of a `val`, not a `var`.
