# Next Steps in Scala

## Step 7. Parameterize arrays with types

In Scala, you can instantiate objects, or class instances, using `new`. When you instantiate an object in Scala, you can *parameterize* it with values and types. Parameterization means “configuring” an instance when you create it.

When you parameterize an instance with both a type and a value, the type comes first in its square brackets, followed by the value in parentheses.

test.scala:
```scala
val greetingStrings = new Array[String](3)
greetingStrings(0) = "Hello"
greetingStrings(1) = ", "
greetingStrings(2) = "World!\n"

for (i <- 0 to 2)
  print(greetingStrings(i))
```
```shell
$ scala test.scala
Hello, World!
```

When you define a variable with `val`, the variable can’t be reassigned, but the object to which it refers could potentially still be changed.

When you apply parentheses surrounding one or more values to a variable, Scala will transform the code into an invocation of a method named apply on that variable.
- `greetStrings(i)` ➾ `greetStrings.apply(i)`
- `1 + 2` ➾ `(1).+(2)`

Scala provides a more concise way to create and initialize ar- rays that you would normally use.
```scala
val nums1 = Array[String](3)
nums(0) = "zero"
nums(1) = "one"
nums(2) = "two"
```
```scala
val nums = Array("zero", "one", "two")
```
- it's a factory method, named `apply`, which creates and returns the new array. This `apply` method takes a variable number of arguments and is defined on the `Array` companion object.

## Step 8. Use lists

One of the big ideas of the functional style of programming is that methods should not have side effects. Another benefit (in a statically typed language) is that everything that goes into and out of a method is checked by a type checker, so logic errors are more likely to manifest themselves as type errors.

A Scala array is a mutable sequence of objects that all share the same type.
For an immutable sequence of objects that share the same type you can use Scala’s List class.
- `val oneTwoThree = List(1, 2, 3)`

```scala
val oneTwo = List(1, 2)
val threeFour = List(3, 4)
val oneTwoThreeFour = oneTwo ::: threeFour
println(oneTwo +" and "+ threeFour +" were not mutated.")
println("Thus, "+ oneTwoThreeFour +" is a new list.")
```
```scala
val twoThree = List(2, 3)
val oneTwoThree = 1 :: twoThree
println(oneTwoThree)
```
The most common operator you’ll use with lists is ‘::’, which is pronounced “cons.” Cons prepends a new element to the beginning of an existing list, and returns the resulting list.
- `::` is a method of its *right operand*, the list, twoThree.
- If the method name ends in a colon, the method is invoked on the right operand.

### Why not append to lists?
Class List does offer an `append` operation but this operation is rarely used, because the time it takes to append to a list grows linearly with the size of the list, whereas prepending with `::` takes constant time. Your options if you want to build a list efficiently by appending elements is to prepend them, then when you’re done call reverse; or use a `ListBuffer`, a mutable list that does offer an append operation, and when you’re done call `toList`.

### Step 9. Use tuples

Like lists, tuples are immutable, but unlike lists, tuples can contain different types of elements.

```scala
val pair = (99, "Luftballons")
println(pair._1)
println(pair._2)
```

### Accessing the elements of a tuple
You may be wondering why you can’t access the elements of a tuple like the elements of a list, for example, with `pair(0)`. The reason is that a list’s `apply` method always returns **the same type**, but each element of a tuple may be a different type: `_1` can have one result type, `_2` another, and so on. These `_N` numbers are **one-based**, instead of zero-based, because starting with 1 is a tradition set by other languages with statically typed tuples, such as Haskell and ML.

## Step 10. Use sets and maps

```scala
scala.collection.Set «trait»
  |
  \-- scala.collection.immutable.Set «trait»
  |     |
  |     \-- scala.collection.immutable.HashSet
  |
  \-- scala.collection.mutable.Set «trait»
        |
        \-- scala.collection.mutable.HashSet
```
- these three traits all share the same simple name, `Set`. Their fully qualified names differ, however, because each resides in a different package.

```scala
var jetSet = Set("Boeing", "Airbus")
jetSet += "Lear"
println(jetSet.contains("Cessna"))
```
- you’re working with an immutable set, thus the `+` invocation will yield a brand new set

```scala
import scala.collection.mutable.Set
val movieSet = Set("Hitch", "Poltergeist")
movieSet += "Shrek"
println(movieSet)
```
- `+=` is an actual method defined on mutable sets 

```scala
scala.collection.Map «trait»
  |
  \-- scala.collection.immutable.Ma[ «trait»
  |     |
  |     \-- scala.collection.immutable.HashMap
  |
  \-- scala.collection.mutable.Map «trait»
        |
        \-- scala.collection.mutable.HashMap
```

```scala
import scala.collection.mutable.Map
val treasureMap = Map[Int, String]()
treasureMap += (1 -> "Go to island.")
treasureMap += (2 -> "Find big X on ground.")
treasureMap += (3 -> "Dig.")
println(treasureMap(2))
```
- The `->` method, which you can invoke on any object in a Scala program, returns a two-element tuple containing the key and value.
 
## Step 11. Learn to recognize the functional style

The first step is to recognize the difference between the two styles in code. One telltale sign is that if code contains any `var`s, it is probably in an *imperative style*. If the code contains no `var`s at all — i.e., it contains only `val`s — it is probably in a *functional style*.

```scala
def printArgs(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
  var i = 0
  while (i < args.length) {
    println(args(i))
    i += 1
  }
}
```
```scala
def printArgs(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
  for (arg <- args)
    println(arg)
}
```
```scala
def printArgs(args: Array[String]): Unit = {
  args.foreach(println)
}
```
- The refactored (more functional) code is clearer, more concise, and less error-prone than the original (more imperative) code.

```scala
def formatArgs(args: Array[String]) = args.mkString("\n")
println(formatArgs(args))
```
- A more functional approach would be to define a method that formats the passed args for printing, but just returns the formatted string. Now you’re really functional: no side effects or vars in sight.

### A balanced attitude for Scala programmers

Prefer `val`s, immutable objects, and methods without side effects. Reach for them first. Use `var`s, mutable objects, and methods with side effects when you have a specific need and justification for them.
