# Classes and Objects

## 4.1 Classes, fields, and methods

A class is a blueprint for objects. Once you define a class, you can create objects from the class blueprint with the keyword new.

Inside a class definition, you place fields and methods, which are collectively called *members*. 
- Fields, which you define with either `val` or `var`, are variables that refer to objects. The fields hold the state, or data, of an object.
- Methods, which you define with `def`, contain executable code. The methods use that data to do the computational work of the object. 

```scala
class ChecksumAccumulator {
  private var sum = 0
  def add(b: Byte): Unit = sum += b
  def checksum(): Int = ~(sum & 0xFF) + 1
}

val acc = new ChecksumAccumulator
val csa = new ChecksumAccumulator
```

The first step is to prevent outsiders from accessing the fields directly by making the fields `private`.
- you’d say “public” in Java, you simply say nothing in Scala. Public is Scala’s default access level.

The recommended style for methods is in fact to avoid having explicit, and especially multiple, `return` statements. Instead, think of each method as an expression that yields one value, which is returned. This philosophy will encourage you to make methods quite small, to factor larger methods into multiple smaller ones.

Methods with a result type of `Unit` are executed for their *side effects*. A side effect is generally defined as mutating state somewhere external to the method or performing an I/O action.

## 4.2 Semicolon inference

In a Scala program, a semicolon at the end of a statement is usually optional. A semicolon is required if you write multiple statements on a single line.

```scala
val s = "hello"; println(s)
```

In short, a line ending is treated as a semicolon unless one of the following conditions is true:
1. The line in question ends in a word that would not be legal as the end of a statement, such as a period or an infix operator.
2. The next line begins with a word that cannot start a statement.
3. The line ends while inside parentheses `(...)` or brackets `[...]`, because these cannot contain multiple statements anyway.
4. 
```scala
  val x = 1                                       //> x  : Int = 1
  val y = 2                                       //> y  : Int = 2

  x + y                                           //> res0: Int = 3
  
  x +
    y                                             //> res1: Int = 3

  (x
    + y)                                          //> res2: Int = 3

  {
    x
    +y
  }                                               //> res3: Int = 2
```

## 4.3 Singleton objects

Scala cannot have static members. Instead, Scala has *singleton objects*.

When a singleton object shares the same name with a class, it is called that class’s *companion object*. You must define both the class and its companion object in the same source file. The class is called the *companion class* of the singleton object. A class and its companion object can access each other’s private members.

A singleton object is more than a holder of static methods, however. It is a first-class object. You can think of a singleton object’s name, therefore, as a “name tag” attached to the object.

One difference between classes and singleton objects is that singleton objects cannot take parameters, whereas classes can. Because you can’t instantiate a singleton object with the new keyword, you have no way to pass parameters to it.

Each singleton object is implemented as an instance of a synthetic class referenced from a static variable, so they have the same initialization semantics as Java statics. The name of the synthetic class is the object name plus a dollar sign (`$`).

A singleton object that does not share the same name with a companion class is called a *standalone object*. You can use standalone objects for many purposes, including collecting related *utility methods* together, or defining an *entry point* to a Scala application.

## 4.4 A Scala application

To run a Scala program, you must supply the name of a standalone singleton object with a `main` method that takes one parameter, an `Array[String]`, and has a result type of `Unit`.

showargs.scala:
```scala
object ShowArgs {
  def main(args: Array[String]) {
    args.foreach(println)
  }
}
```
```shell
$ scalac showargs.scala
$ scala ShowArgs hello world scala
hello
world
scala
```

## 4.5 The Application trait

The way this works is that trait Application declares a main method of the appropriate signature, which your singleton object inherits, making it usable as a Scala application. The code between the curly braces is collected into a primary constructor of the singleton object, and is executed when the class is initialized.

test.scala:
```scala
object Test extends MyApplication {
  println("hello world")
}
trait MyApplication {
  def main(args: Array[String]) {}
}
```
```shell
$ scalac test.scala
$ scala Test
hello world
```
